Metroidvania Idea

#I dunno man, I'm tired, I just finished 'Islets' and it got me thinking. This is inspired by a mix of Hollow Knight, Islets and the battle system of SP:FBW#

General Concept
You're a small ball of fluff* in a world without light** and the entire goal is to bring light into the world, restoring electricity, ecosystems, so on, so forth.
*You being a small ball of fluff is a placeholder, but I want something to do with a battery cell, however the player should not realise this until the end.
**The world used to have light meaning there is a destoryed civilisation now without it.
You have to navigate your way through a variety of terrains consisting of like 30-50 rooms each and you must bring light to each one.
The level layout plays on the fact you cant see what you're doing until you light up the room in certain ways.
As for how they light up the room, I'm thinking character abilities.
The abilities should be distributed by character.
In Hollow Knight and Islets, you play as one character and get new abilities, but what if in this, you switch characters for different abilities.
When the game starts, it introduces you to a team, however you get seperated and by completing certain objectives and/or bosses, you can free/unlock another character.
The team could start off as the 3 of you and you meet 2 others while exploring the dark.
I feel as though the characters should be optional but if you unlock and use them, it makes the game easier.
The reason the world fell into darkness is because of a botched Science experiment in the lab, which has now been long abandonded.
The darkness was caused by a machine which sucked up the light and is continuing to do so, removing all light from the world.
You meet two of the allies before the game starts, so they are friends from the get go.
In the allies eyes, you are a lone, unknown creature in need of help which upon helping, they obtained a strange light power.
Your character convinces the two allies pre game to go with you into the lab, they know not why.
Your goal is to beat the Light absorbing machine, consume its light and restore it to the world.
The light machine is sentient and is using the light to create an army of strange creature to anhialate any who stand before it.
If you want more info on this ask. The more I talk to people about this entire concept, the more clear in my mind it becomes.

Ability Concept (Explore Ver)
When it comes to the abilities, I have a couple in mind, all of which are subject to change depending on opinions. 
I'm not sure but some of the abilities should be triggered, I think, and others periodically and automatic.
I will draw little sketches to show each one in the folder, external to this Notepad. 
The images will corrospond with the number in front of each ability concept.
1) The main character could have an normal light effect round themself, it lasts 5 seconds with a cooldown of 3 seconds, or maybe its permanent, I dont know.
2) One of the other characters could have a light which they throw like a javalin in front of them, this lights up a trail and sticks into the wall for 5 seconds.
3) Another could pulsate light, which covers the entire screen but its pulsating from the character in an expanding circle. There will be 6 key points in this.
4) Then you could have one use a Yoyo or something to spiral light out and then back in again as a trail of the yoyo.
5) A slow moving 2*character-sized light; a slow but safer way to get around.

Fight Concept
In Hollow Knight and Islets, the fighting is more like a bullet hell, dodge and then hit repetatively as enemies get faster, higher damage and generally harder to beat.
However, in this game, I thought it would be an interesting idea to have that only act as the battle initiation.
If the enemy hits you with one of its attacks, it gets to go first. 
If you are successful in dodging and hit the enemy with a light ability, you get to start the battle.
The battle system will be done like South Park: The Fractured But Whole, because admit it, the fighting mechanic was great.
All the characters you have obtained will be present in the fight.
The enemy attacks when initiating the fight will be shown a brief outline, giving the players the chance to see and dodge, everything else is black though.
The actual fight will be gridded, like the game referenced and character attacks will hit according to their abilites.
Once again, in battle the enemy cant be seen but can be heard, however this will be shown on screen with a marker when they are taking action.
If you forget where the enemy is on the battle screen while its your turn, jokes on you, get gud.
So each character shouldn't only have thier ability though, I think a normal attack should work too.
The normal attacks will also vary in range depending on the character, eg main character attacks one tile in front whereas the Javalin user hits one tile far away.
To see all the actual combat options, refer to thr 'Ability Concept (Battle Ver)'.
With this fight system, you can also add levelling into it and a form of MP for the light power attacks.
You can also use weapons which would be character specific as well as Armour.

Exploring Concept
In explore mode, just like Islets and Hollow Knight, the exploration is done in that of a 2D platformer.
You will have a map which will automatically fill in as your light attacks hit it, eg the javalin would light up a line on the map.
The lights only last a certain amount of time and arent necessary to explore, but it will be damn hard without it.
There will of course be secret areas you can unlock as well as places you cant get to without an exploration ability you get later on.
Similar to other games abilities, there could be a wall climb or wall bounce, a dash, a teleport and more.
In the exploration sence, it is very similar to most other 2D platformers. For examples look at Hollow Knight and Islets, fucking great games.
Something unique to the exploration is you can harvest and farm materials from enemies and hidden locations. This would be how you get weapons and armour.
I think there should be an exclusive set for each character which invloves lots of secrets to get secret parts to build it.

Ability Concept (Battle)
Each Light ability in battle should reflect their exploration light ability.
Like the 'Ability Concept (Explore Ver)', each ability will be numbered and you can refer to the images in the folder this notepad was in.
Each number will also corrolate to the same number ability in the other ability section.
1) The 8 tiles around them light up in a circle around the player.
2) Throws a Javalin in a straight line either Horizontal or Vertical. This can peirce one enemy but stops upon hitting the second.
3) Lights up in a hexagonal shape the area one tile away from him. This is a lot easier to show than explain, like its explore version.
4) Rotates around 3 tiles away, also easier to show. When hitting an enemy, moves in front of them.
5) Hits the tile in front, high damage, could also be used to buff allies(?).
There could also be healing abilities which use light magic.
Normal attacks will follow the same number system.
1) Deals damage to the any enemies one tile in front and the tile above and below said tile.
2) Throws the Javalin hitting one spot between 3-5 tiles away, player chooses.
3) Hits around in a circle, very low damage. Only damages the tiles closest to character but knocks any enemies in a 2 tile radius back a tile.
4) Throws the yoyo straight, attacks hit like Horses movements in Chess.
5) Charges forward 2 tiles, stops upon impact, takes tile enemy is on and pushes them back one.

Lighting Up The Envirnoment
As for lighting up the environment, Im torn between 2 ideas.
Idea 1 is that after defeating a boss and therefore clearing out the main threat of an area, you can activate a generator.
This Generator lights up the entire zone so you can explore in the light and be able to move more freely, grind enemies, etc.
Idea 2 is similar in the generator sense, but you have to go back to each room to find a switch to light up that specific room.
We could also have this without the generator part. 
However I feel players a less likely to return and will feel less excited to light up the place as the gimmick would get old quickly.

Stat Concept
Follows most stat based games.
Minimum level is 1, Max level is 100
Gain EXP from fighting or from exploring.
EXP required to level increases the higher level you are. Stops gaining EXP when level 100.
ATK (Attack) - How much damage all attacks will do, both light and normal.
LP (Light Points) - Light attacks could consume this as they are more powerful.
HP (Health Points) - How much damage they would need to take to be killed.
LR (Light Regen) - Light should regen over time, different characters generate light as different speeds.
DEF (Defence) - Higher it is, the more damage is reduced. Not a multiplyer. You see them do 300 damage with 100 def, they would've normally done 400 damage.

Area Concepts
Personally, I think 6 big areas should be enough, considering there is about 30-50 rooms in each one.
There should also be at least one safe area with NPCs which can act as shops or just chats to learn lore.
It would also be fun if each area had a unique gimmick.
The full map should reprosent different areas of a scientific headquarters. This will make more sense as you read on.

Area 1 - Cietonper (Annogram of Reception) or something more traditional like Reception -> Holding Bay -> Bay + Darkness ->Blight = Blight Bay? Alliteration = catchy?
Maybe it should be more about Corridors instead of Reception, I only chose reception as it works as a clear beginning and tutorial-like area.
If its reception, it could have the name soridocrr (crr pronounced sir, like in the language which i dont remember which one it was). OR just Closed Corridors.
When lit up, very white, decently well preserved? Think of a old reception area for some sort of clinic which is a bit dirty and has some weeds growing in the cracks. 
The Gimmick of this area I dont know yet.
The boss here will be unique enemy, a guard who is stopping people from going deeper inside the lab as it's dangerous.
The fight will function like a normal fight, just a bit longer and harder (UwU).

Area 2 - Enigmatology Lab
This area specialises in puzzles and hidden items, very explorative. I feel, due to this, it should be the second largest area in the game, second only to the Termed Optics Lab.
Visually, this place takes on more of a horror type theme. Not necessarily scary but like a mix between abandoned lab and haunted house.
For reference look at the Haunted Castle Zone from Sonic Heroes.
The gimmick of this area plays into the theme with keys and codes which the player must find and piece together. 
While this gimmick wont be completely exclusive to this area, it will be highly dominated by them and contain much more difficult ones the further in you go, optionally.
Your first ally, Character [X], will join the team very shortly after entering this area.
The boss of this area will keep initiating whenever you enter a certain area, it is virtually impossible to beat with only the 2 characters at such a low level.
Instead, for the boss, you have to run away fighting normal enemies in the process, Look at the Spontaneous Bootay fight from SP:TFBW for reference.
You can come back and initiate this boss whenever and try to fight it whenever. It will lock off (body block) about 1/3rd of this entire area.
Everything behind it is optional and is intended to be something the player comes back to Post Area 5 - The Genetics Lab.

Area 3 - The Redangs (Annogram of Gardens) OR Overgrown -> Left Alone -> Vacant + Garden -> Plants -> Bontany = Bontanical Vacancy?
Thunk of a huge garden, completely overgrown with a few white tiled patways here and there. The tiles are dark grey now cos dirt.
When lit up, there should be a large variety of bright colours, mostly green as 
The gimmick here is you can manipulate plant growth. Eg use light ability on plant (Photosynthesis), grow plant, climb plant, get to area you couldnt before.
Plant in the way? You can destroy it. How is up for debate though.
The final boss of this area will be a common trope, a sentiant plant, powered by the harnessed light enegy.
This plant boss is also absorbing the Light of Character [Y], who is trapped. The plant can use alternate versions of Character [Y]'s attacks.
Character [Y] will join the team upon defeating the area boss.

Area 4 - Chemistry Lab
Gimmick wise, this area you can find different mineral and materials around to make potions which could make you change size, restore health, LP or even the inverse.
As for the style, think of a science classroom from school, especially the B107 etc lot as theyre quite dark.
There shouldnt be many plants here either as the remaining chemicals kill such things wuite quickly.
On that note, the Gimmick could instead be a timer of sorts, you take damage if you're exposed to the chemicals for too long.
There can be checkpoints to replenish this as it could be done via a meter located somewhere on the screen.
For reference of this mechanic, you can look at the Dragonspine Cold Meter from Genshin.
Then, the boss of this area some creature who has understood the chemicals and uses them effectively in battle, buffing themselves and debuffing your team.
And just to piss people off, this fucker can heal too, though only once everyn 5 turns or something.

Area 5 - Genetics Lab
Very enemy infested area, lots of fights, difficulty curve.
Should be one of the smallest areas in the game as the focus is on the fighting aspect.
The gimmick here should be each battle having a unique status ailment for both allied and enemy character. Eg. All characters heal 10% HP per turn or 10% DMG per turn.
You will also encounter unique enemies which are amalgamations of previous enemies.
This area will also involve the only fight against a playable character, Character 5: The Javalin user, who will join you after this fight, the last to join your party.
The fight against Character 5 will be about half way through the area, maybe a bit before and therefore not the final boss, though it should have the difficulty of one.
The final boss of this area should be an amalgamation of all area-final-bosses fought so far meaning a variety of a 4 different types of attacks, evolved to be stronger.
For example of the evolved attacks, if one had a beam forward, it could become a beam forward and diagonal or much much heavier hitting.

Area 6 - Termed Optics Lab
This area should involve the gimmicks of each predecessing area while being much more difficult than all previous areas.
The area should emphasise that it's the last.
Aesthetics of this area should be the epitomy of an forgotten lab filled with plants, strange creatures and an ominous tone as it should be bright in a dark way. 
Honestly that last bit is hard to explain, let me know if you need me to elaborate more to you as right now, I can't think of a better way to word it.
The boss of this area should be a machine, the machine which caused the darkness disaster and the vessels of the scientists who caused it being used as puppets to protect it.
As this is the final boss, it should be hands down, the hardest in the game. I think it should be the machine, which doesnt fight, only creates minions.
These minions are normal enemies you encounter.
The Scientist puppets act like mini bosses, except all this is happening at once.
If you kill the machine, all its spawns will drop dead minus the Scientists.
When each scientist is defeated, they each debuff the machine and its summons in some way. Eg atk down or def down.
 
Character Concepts
Main Character 
Species - Sentient Mechansim (Battery Cell)
Skills - Roll, Climb
Gender - Unkown
Dominant Hand - Not Applicable
Literally a circular Battery Cell covered in Ionic Dust.
The other characters are unaware of what their species is until the final area.
They cannot talk and have no physical body, meaning they roll everywhere.
They can use the ionic dust to climb flat and vertical surfaces.
Their roll is also one of the fastest ways to get around and yes, they can jump, though it's more of a bounce.
There is not meant to be much to their character as thats for the player to decide and relate to them.
Their set, when it comes to abilities, should be set 1 as it is basic but effective fitting with the character.
His attacks can be him rolling at enemies instead of actually using some form of wepaon on them.

Character 2
Species - Evolved Bat
Skills - Dash (Think Shadow Cloak with Badge in Hollow Knight), Gliding
Gender - GenderFluid - Joking, he's a Male
Dominant Hand - Omni
Holds a typical Bat face, but with 6 legs, like a centaur but full bat. He can rotate his body to be flat like a centipede or even like a Biped.
When standing still, he is on his 2 back legs but when moving he drops onto 4. All his hands are claw and hook-like.
He has 2 sets of wings on his back, the lower set much smaller than the other set and are used for boosts of speed.
His large upper wings have one sharp point on them and while they don't allow him to fly, they allow him to glide.
These big wings can also wrap around his head making a nail like shape with the top, sharp points of the wings which allows him to attack enemies while dashing.
Like bats, he is virtually, but not completely blind and has strong sense of hearing and smell.
His ability set I feel fits number 5 as the slow moving light can be similar to Echo-Echo-Echo, Echolocation (I find my way, I find my pray.)
Also his dash can work as the normal attack, dashing into enemies and his claws can be used for the Echolocation like light attack.
He is an ally from the beginning of the game and his light power was given to him by the MC.
He should be the first, if not the second character you unlock.

Character 3
Species - Minotaur
Skills - Slam (Destoys Boulders) & Stomp (Destroys weak ground beneath her), Grappling (Via hook like objects and Yoyo)
Gender - Female
Dominant Hand - Right
Going against the species 'norms' is something she takes pride in.
When most people think of a minotaur, they think of a straight-laced, increadibly powerful, all brute strength, not brainy and more often than not, male.
She is very complex, somewhat brainy and... well, not a male. The only thing which is true, is she still has heavy power, despite her objections to it.
Using her strength, she is capable of breaking the floor beneath her with a stomp or punching boulders to make them shatter.
She views her strength as others being weak more than she is strong.
She tries to be cool too, though she won't admit it, donning 'fashionable' clothes and a yoyo in combat.
This yoyo is special however as using her strength combined with a special material, she can snap the string of the yoyo, causing it to harden for a more impactful hit.
This yoyo is, therefore also more than capable of hooking onto things and carrying people's weight across large gaps.
The ability set she should use is 4, as she uses a Yoyo and the attacks arew oriented around that.

Character 4
Species - Cat Mermaid (Top half Cat, Lower half Fish)
Skills - Swim, Spring (Can launch themselves directly upwards)
Gender - Female, I guess?
Dominant Hand - Left
Literally a walking contradiction, or perhaps swimming is a more fitting word.
They move faster in water than on ground and is the only one capable of deep diving.
A Black Cats body is the top half of this creature and the lower half is that of a grey, shiny eel.
Hates Water despite being agile in it, Loves fish, despite half being one.
She can coil her eel half and use it to spring upwards when out of water.
Very loud and goofy, but can also be extremely slick when she needs to be.
Contrary to cats, she is rather dumb and clumsy when her full focus is not on something.
The abiltity set she should use could be, and I say could be as I'm not entirely sure, 3.
I chose Ability 3 for her as the hexagonal points in her abilities could be bubbles, fitting when shes a water based character.

Character 5 
Species - Altered Human
Skills - Long Throw (Allows him to hit objects from afar with his Javalin), Spot Dodge (While still, can dodge an attack, has cooldown).
Gender - Male
Dominant Hand - Right
A Human which survived, albeit altered, the Incident which caused the ever-present darkness. He used to be a scientist in the study of Termed Optics.
The incident was NOT caused by him, though he knew of it's existence before the occurance.
One alteration he sufferered was his eyes glow a blinding light. He is the only one of the characters who did not get their light ability from the MC.
When he uses his Javalin, his opens his right eye and you see a flash on-screen as the javalin gets launched in the chosen direction.
Perhaps this eye light could also be used as a unlockable combat ability to stun.
As a result of this, he keeps his eyes closed and relies on his other sences, which have become stronger.
He maintains a combat-ready stance with his left foot forward and left hand out ready to counter anything hostile he comes into contact with.
The ability set he should have is Ability set 2.